Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger. Today, we are
going to be looking at almost philosophical
aspects of what mathematics is really about.
It's a very interesting question, of course.
It touches base with philosophical or scientific
issues, and there are lots of different opinions
that are possible. But I'm going to be sort of
positioning things in a somewhat novel way, as
you'll see. There's a really essential dichotomy
or duality that manifests itself. So if you asked
the ancient Greeks what mathematics was, they
would have probably said something like arithmetic
and geometry—at least when we're talking
about pure mathematics. Applied mathematics,
of course, also involves astronomy and other
subjects. But pure mathematics really rests on
arithmetic and geometry. Later on, algebra would
also have been included in that general story.
Now, which of these is actually fundamental
has changed over the years. With the Cartesian
Revolution, the emphasis shifted from geometry
as being sort of fundamental to more arithmetic,
and that's really what most mathematicians these
days, I think, would lean towards—that arithmetic
is really sort of the bottom of mathematics,
really resting ultimately on the framework of the
natural numbers, which we denote by "N" or "Nat."
But in the 20th century, a new direction appeared
when people were trying to create a framework for
modern analysis. They realized that things were a
little bit difficult, and they ended up bringing
in philosophers and philosophical approaches,
which ultimately resulted in creating set
theory—this modern set theory—which ostensibly is
some kind of framework for analysis. We are going
to critique this very strongly in future videos,
but that was sort of the motivation
for this introduction of set theory
as a foundational framework for mathematics. In
that direction, people started asking, "Well,
if we're going to use set theory to prop
up analysis"—they didn't say it that way,
of course, but that was really what was going
on—"then how about other parts of mathematics?
Can we build arithmetic from set theory?" And then
they did come up with a scheme for doing this. So,
by the end of the 20th century, we had this
idea that first we start with set theory,
and then we create arithmetic, geometry,
algebra, analysis, and so on from that.
Here is this way of constructing natural numbers
from sets that goes back to John von Neumann,
which we've talked about. So in this framework,
everything is a set, and the starting point is
the empty set, which turns out to be what we
equate with the number zero. Then we create
the number one by taking this empty set
and taking a set containing the empty set,
so it's really the set containing zero. The
number two—well, one way of describing it is
that it's the set consisting of both 0 and
1. So here is 0, and here is 1, and that
combination is the number 2. Then the number 3 is
the set consisting of 0, 1, and 2. So there's 0,
there's 1, and there's the 2 that we've just
created. So we get this inductive way of
creating natural numbers using these ever-bigger
zoos of forests of sets within sets within sets.
If we ask something like, "What is 78,143
explicitly in the system?" Well, then we have a
very big headache. If we had to actually stare at
that thing and write it down, or even just stare
at it in terms of these brackets, it would be a
very big headache. But aside from being rather
unwieldy and, I think to most people, unnatural,
this set-theoretical approach to natural numbers
also has some theoretical challenges. In
particular, how are we going to define
the operations of addition and multiplication
on natural numbers when we view them in this
very complicated set-theoretical fashion? And how
are we going to prove the laws of arithmetic from
those definitions? Now, it is supposed by most
practicing mathematicians that this has been done
somewhere, somewhere over the hill. Some logicians
have done this, and we don't have to worry about
it—that the laws of arithmetic are just God-given
to us by the logicians. It's an unhappy state of
affairs. So it means that modern students aren't
actually exposed to seeing the arguments in front
of them. We're not talking about something
that's very tangential or oblique, right?
This is a core issue in mathematics: how are we
going to set up arithmetic with natural numbers?
If we're going to do it in such a convoluted
way that we can only sort of point to these
indirect references to things that are somewhere
else, it's a very unhappy state of affairs.
The 20th-century thinking has been very
disappointing, really. There's this whole sequence
of wrong thinkings that have been introduced
in this general direction. We have this idea
that math is based on sets, that everything
is a set. The definition of a set itself is
finessed by the use of axioms. We really ought
to define what a set is properly if we're going
to base everything on sets, but that's too hard,
and so we just assume that we know what a set is
and invoke axioms to conjure up the things that
really ought to be theorems. The foundations of
arithmetic then become subservient to unwieldy and
overly complicated set-theoretic arguments. The
naturalness of arithmetic is lost. We're giving up
our arithmetic to the set theorists, and in fact,
no one really uses the proofs critically. When I
say "no one," I mean practicing mathematicians,
students at universities, people who
actually use the mathematics. To them,
these proofs are essentially non-existent;
they're invisible. And I think it's a very
unhappy state of affairs. We're talking about
arithmetic, after all, right? We ought to be
able to lay out arithmetic in a more sensible
and more publicly verifiable way than this.
So I'm going to be advocating a very
different approach to arithmetic in how
we set up arithmetic, very different from the
20th century's point of view. The advantage
with our approach to arithmetic is that, first
of all, we are going to be flexible about which
data structures are suitable. We don't just have
sets at our disposal; we have lists, ordered sets,
multisets, as well as sets. And we have now
some experience being able to judge that maybe,
in certain situations, one of these is better
than another. So we have a flexibility that
the set theorists don't. This gives us a big
advantage. Our definitions are going to be clear,
and they're going to relate directly to common
usage and intuition. We want an ordinary person
to be able to look at our definition and say,
"Yeah, that kind of corresponds to the way we
think about things," especially when we're talking
about natural numbers and their arithmetic,
for heaven's sake! All right, the theoretical
manifestation of the subject ought to correlate
with the way people actually do arithmetic—that's
not asking that much. Our proofs are going to
make sense; they're going to be visible. We
can actually explain them to non-experts. We
don't have to pretend that we need all kinds of
prior logical training in order to be able to
deal with the complexity of these proofs.
And we're going to see that the doors are
open to further insights into adjacent fields.
Once we understand arithmetic in a better way,
a lot of other adjacent things are just going to
be more accessible to us. And we're going to stick
to reality, okay? And avoid wishful thinking. Just
because we want something to be true doesn't mean
that we're going to force it into our theory.
We're going to let nature decide what is true.
All right, so here is our main definition—the key
definition of what a natural number is: a natural
number is an M-set or multiset of marks, marks
on a page. So, for example, this thing here—it's
an M-set, as you can see by the brackets on the
outside—and it contains a mark, and another mark,
and another mark. So these vertical strokes or
marks are going to be the things inside our M-set.
There's only going to be one kind of thing in
these M-sets; they're always going to be the same,
these vertical strokes or marks. So that's what
we would ordinarily call the number three. That's
going to be our official designation, our physical
specification of what we informally call the
number three. The number seventeen—that's what it
looks like officially; it's a multiset consisting
of a lot of strokes. And there is a stroke,
or a mark, mark, mark, mark, mark, mark, mark,
mark, mark, mark, mark, mark, mark, mark—that's
going to be our number seventeen. And notably,
because we're talking about M-sets, we're
going to allow the possibility that there
are no marks inside our M-set, that it's an empty
M-set, and that's going to be our number zero.
So, as opposed to previous usage,
with this approach to natural numbers,
we are going to include zero as a natural
number. This is a big difference from what
we've been doing throughout this series up till
now. The series has always taken the point of
view that the natural numbers begin with one. But
when we adopt this multiset point of view, it's
more natural to include the empty multiset as a
possibility, and so we have a natural number zero.
Okay, that's all well and good, but there's still
this question: what exactly is a mark? Okay,
so it's something that we're writing
down on the page. It's a symbol,
and it looks kind of like a 1, but I'm trying
to make it a little bit longer than a 1 so
that we distinguish it a little bit from
the number 1. But what does it actually
represent? So the answer involves going deeper.
I claim that the natural numbers are not at the
bottom of things—that's usually the point of
view towards modern mathematics—that there's
actually something else underneath the natural
numbers. And I'm now going to reveal what that is:
there's something even more fundamental,
essential, basic than our number system.
All right, so what is this essential dichotomy
or duality underlying mathematics? It's revealed
here in this slide, which arguably
might be the single most important
slide in all of my videos. What do we
see? Well, we see on this side nothing;
nothing. On this side, something. There's a
difference—the difference between nothing and
something. I claim that this simple-minded
notice is really the central core dichotomy
or duality underlying mathematics—the
distinction between nothing and something.
So this mark or stroke that we're representing
here, this basic symbol that we're using,
is the ingredient for our natural numbers.
This is our representation of something;
it's a symbol that we introduce, which
represents this intuitive idea of a
thing. So we are definitely accessing our
intuition here; we're not giving definitions
of something or definitions of nothing. If we
did that, we would go in philosophical circles;
we could do that for years and years, talking
about what does nothing mean, what does something
mean. Okay, I just want to base things on our
intuitive understanding of those terms. We all
have an intuitive understanding of those terms and
represent the something by this symbol. There are
other possible symbols that we could have used and
that we could use. So we've used this one here,
but maybe somebody else might be more comfortable
with a small circle, or a star, or maybe a slanted
line, or maybe even a dot. Those would
be alternative, completely valid ways of
representing something. We could, of course, have
other symbols as well, but the point is we're just
choosing one particular symbol, and that symbol
represents this primordial idea of something.
And nothing—well, there's no choice about how
to represent that. There may be a lot of choices
about how to represent something, but there's no
choice about how to represent nothing. It's always
represented in the same way—by emptiness. You
leave the page empty; you don't put anything on
it. That is nothing, in our view. That's how we're
representing nothing on the page; it's just empty.
So although we've given a general definition
of natural numbers as M-sets of marks,
we still want to construct them, okay?
We want to create them, put them on a
page, and demonstrate what it is that we're
talking about explicitly. And we're going to
do this inductively, which means one step at a
time. I'm going to start with our empty M-set,
which is the simplest possible situation. It's
the empty M-set, which has nothing inside it;
it contains nothing. And we're going to give
it a name. We're going to call it zero because
that's the traditional word that we use for
that particular number, and we'll often write
it as a separate symbol with this sort of "o"-type
number symbol. So zero is, by definition for us,
this M-set here. So, in fact, this symbol here
is extraneous; we don't actually really need it.
It's logically unnecessary; we could use just
this thing here instead of zero everywhere. But
we prefer to connect with ordinary experience
and just then think about the usual zero as
being actually, officially, this empty M-set.
So for us, this is the first natural number;
it's the first one that we actually explicitly
write down. Our first natural number is zero.
And now we can construct more natural
numbers, and the idea is always the same:
we're going to take what we have, and
we're going to add something to it;
we're going to insert something. So the next one
is this one here—the set or M-set consisting of
something. It's an M-set with a single mark in
it. So make a mark, you put it in the M-set,
and that we can say is the number one. And then we
can take this one and insert another mark beside
it, so we have mark, mark. That M-set is two.
Mark, mark, mark—that's the M-set three. Mark,
mark, mark, mark—that's the M-set four. Mark,
mark, mark, mark, mark—that's the M-set five.
Notice, first of all, how much simpler this
construction of natural numbers is than the
set-theoretical one. Okay, notice that
it's actually a natural progression that
actually mirrors ordinary usage. Primitive
peoples would have written number five in
very much this way—a bunch of five
marks on a page, a piece of papyrus,
or something. This is very natural. The only
thing that's a little bit sophisticated,
that they wouldn't have done, is putting
everything in a pair of brackets to enclose it,
to make the boundary very clear that the natural
number doesn't extend out here or out here.
So these natural numbers are so
constructed in order. We see that
it's not just that we have a whole bunch of
natural numbers; rather, we start with zero,
and then we start to sequentially construct
more and more. There's a natural order:
after zero, then we have this one, and then
we have this one, and then we have this one,
and then we have this one, and then we have
this one, and so on. And we can keep going,
at least until our patience or our resources run
out. So this is very explicit, very concrete,
and now there's no more question about whether we
have a natural number or not. So from this point
of view, you have a natural number precisely when
you can actually write down a multiset of marks.
If you can do that, then that's a natural number.
And if you can't do it, well, then you don't have
such a natural number. It's a very explicit way of
pinning down arithmetic to something concrete and,
in fact, very close to our experience. So this
is going to, I think, be a good foundation for
arithmetic. There's a very good foundation
for everything to take. But notice that it's
exploiting our understanding of multisets. If we
weren't comfortable or familiar with multisets,
we might not think to do this. If we were only
focused on sets, then we're not able to do this.
This is something that we can do because we
do understand multisets—a big power that we've
gotten from understanding our data structures
and not just sticking to 20th-century set theory.
Okay, so one key ingredient in this
discussion is the role of nothing,
okay? Identifying nothing as a kind of ingredient
in this story. And I think it's worthwhile for us
to explore this a little bit more and to discuss
other ways in which this "nothing" concept is
going to figure in the mathematics that we're
slowly going to create here. We've already seen
some examples of it, but we need to readjust our
thinking a little bit because the way we think
about nothing currently in mathematics
is subtly, though quite distinctively,
different from what I'm advocating here. So we
have to get on top of nothing. We'll do that in
our next video. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.